# Concurrent In-Memory Index

| | |
|---|---|
| **Authors** | Mark Hildebrand |
| **Contributors** | <!-- Others who contributed to this RFC --> |
| **Created** | 2026-07-01 |

## Summary

Let's make our in-memory index robust under concurrent operations.

## Motivation

### Background

There are [two methods](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/blob/b603ec009ea5c3cdbbd5358ca88b4a2a30c8d52b/diskann-providers/src/model/graph/provider/async_/common.rs#L148-L195) at the heart of our current in-memory index that deeply bother me: `get_slice` and `get_slice_mut`.
These methods allow concurrent, unsynchronized access between mutable and immutable data.
While there is some measure of safety on the [write path](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/blob/b603ec009ea5c3cdbbd5358ca88b4a2a30c8d52b/diskann-providers/src/model/graph/provider/async_/fast_memory_vector_provider.rs#L44-L47), this is insufficient to prevent a concurrent reader and a writer and there is no systematic safety protocol in place to prevent this situation: safety comments are basically "yolo" (I can make fun of them because I've written such comments myself).

This is problematic for `diskann` for a number of reasons:

* It prevents us from stress testing our algorithm under concurrent inserts/search/deletes etc.
  Unfortunately, this is the situation under which most of our database integrations actually operate.

* Coupled with the lack of ID translation mechanism for the inmem provider, we have no protection against races inserting multiple internal IDs simultaneously or a coherent story between concurrent inserts and deletes to the same ID.

* It makes me sad.

So why is it this way?
Performance!
Yoloing a pointer read is cheap; concurrency is expensive.
An obvious safety mechansim would be to slap a mutex or [fine-grained RCU](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/blob/b603ec009ea5c3cdbbd5358ca88b4a2a30c8d52b/diskann-providers/src/model/graph/provider/async_/memory_vector_provider.rs#L23) around each slot.
Unfortunately, approaches like this that require cache-line **writes** before (and after) each read operation are prohibitively slow and completely unnecessary for [static builds](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/blob/main/diskann-disk/src/build/builder/inmem_builder.rs).

### Problem Statement

Let's try to fix the in-memory provider to make it:

* Well defined under concurrent operations.
* Enable co-development of the core algorithm to patch our remaining concurrency issues.
* Easier to use than our current providers.
* Faster to compile.
* Support external/internal ID translation.
* Have much better tests.
* Without completely compromising performance.

## Proposal

This RFC accompanies [1206](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/pull/1206), which is a MVP of the proposed design.

The design assumes that traffic to the data store is primarily **read** heavy (to facilitate searches).
As such, we're willing to sacrifice some write performance (or more specifically, the time between when a slot is deleted and when it is reused) to make reads fast.
Importantly, readers can determine whether it is safe (or not) to access data with a single 1-byte atomic read.
**Following** a successful check, readers may access the associated data without fear of races.

### Concurrency

**Definition**: A "slot" is any data (potentially spread across multiple containers) that is uniquely associated with an internal ID.
This part of the discussion focuses on slots and concurrently controlling access to the data contained within.

At a high level, consider associating every slot with a 1-byte atomic tag with states

* "available": This slot is free to claim but cannot be read.
  The data managed by this slot should be considered invalid.

* "owned": This slot is exclusively owned by a thread.
  No other threads may access data in the slot and the owner is free to write.

* "published": The slot is publicly available.
  Readers that observe a "published" tag can read the associated data.

#### Attempt 1

Consider a simple (but wholly invalid) concurrency protocol where a writer acquires a slot by transitioning (via [CAS](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/sync/atomic/type.AtomicUsize.html#method.compare_exchange)) the tag from "available" to "owned", writes data, then transitions the slot to "published".
A delete could happen by transitioning from "published" to "owned", do its thing, and then either re-publish or make it "available".
This does not work as a solution to our goal.

The problem is that even if intrepid writer transitions the tag to "owned", it has no guaranteed that readers who observed the "published" state prior to this transition are done using the data.
As a diagram
```
Time   | Reader                     | Writer
-------+----------------------------+-----------
     1 | Reads "published"          |
       | Decides it's safe to read  |
-------+----------------------------+----------------------------------------
     2 |                            | Transitions from "published" to "owned"
-------+----------------------------+----------------------------------------
RACE 3 | Starts Reading             | Starts Writing
```
We get undefined behavior at step 3!

#### Attempt 2

We could augment attempt 1 by having the reader thread check the tag after it finishes its operation.
If it observes a non-"published" state, it can abort its operation.
This cannot be done safely with our current tag scheme due to the ABA problem: a reader could see "published", start its operation, and then get preempted by the operating system (OS).
In the meantime, a writer can transition from "published" to "owned", do its thing, and then set it back to "published".
When the original reader gets back from its vacation, it still sees "published" and thinks everything is okay even though it potentially operated on invalid data.

Schemes like this can be used by constructs like [sequence locks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seqlock).
However, these are

* Famously impossible to represent (without UB) in the semantics of high-level programming languages.

* Basically the only operation you can do "safely" under a sequence lock is a memcpy.
  You can't compute - and we'd really like to be able to compute a distance on the data in-place.

* Require larger counters to avoid longer-ranged versions of the previously described ABA problem where the counter fully wraps around.

#### Solution

What we need a little more communication.
Conceptually, the writer transitions a tag from "published" to "owned", but then **waits** until it can guarantee that no readers are alive any more that could have observed that change.
Only at this point can the writer do its thing without undefined behavior (don't worry, in the implementation here, writers are *not* blocked waiting for readers).

This is where [epoch-based reclamation](https://docs.rs/crossbeam-epoch/latest/crossbeam_epoch/) enters the picture.
For each provider, we maintain an monotonically increasing "epoch".
The idea is that for every search/insert/delete operation, a `Reader` is first created which registers itself as using the current epoch (call it `E`).
This `Reader` behaves as previously described, reading tags and if it observes "published": reading the associated data.
When the operation finishes, the `Reader` deregisters itself.

**Importantly**, a `Reader` can also retire slots by transitioning their tag (via CAS) from "published" to a new "retired" state and inserting the tag index into its epoch-specific queue.
This "retired" state (1) prevents future readers from accessing the data, and (2) prevents other threads from trying to claim the slot.
The epoch-specific queue holds onto the slot ID until all readers who could have observed that transition have been deregistered.

Cleaning up retired items from epoch-queue happens during epoch advancement.
Periodically (e.g., one in every `N` inserts or searches or via a background process), we try to advance the epoch.
An epoch can **only** be advanced from `E` to `E+1` if all registered readers belong to epoch `E`.
Any reader at epoch `E-1` will prevent the transition.
When we successfully advance the epoch, we get the epoch-queue associate with epoch `E-2`.
This queue contains the slot indexes for those retired at epoch `E-2`.
Because all current readers belong to `E` or `E+1`, we are guaranteed that all current readers agree that the state of the tag is "retired" and will not be trying to read any data in the slots contained within the queue.
As such, the thread processing epoch `E-2` is free to write to the data in these slots and transition them to other states without fear of a race, thus solving our problem!

With these scheme, we can keep recycling the same four epoch queues because the scheme guarantees that only two are ever written to at a time.
Literature often claims that just three queues are needed.
We need an extra one because each `Reader` pushes items into the epoch queue associated with the `Reader`'s creation epoch.
A `Reader` in epoch `E` can retire a slot into the `E` queue, but a `Reader` in epoch `E+1` **can** observe this retirement.
Then the epoch advances to `E+2`.
If we pulled the offending slot out of the `E` queue, the `Reader` in `E+1` could still be reading it and we're back to undefined behavior.
Introducing a fourth queue fixes this issue.

#### Implementation

The core components of this protocol are split across three files in #1206:

* `tag.rs`: The implementation of atomic slot tags.
  The PR contains a few more states for slots to enable slots to be in special (e.g., "frozen") states, but follows the main "available", "published", "owned", "retired" scheme outlined above.

* `epoch.rs`: The logic for `Reader` registration, deregistration, epoch advancement, and epoch queues.
  Unsurprisingly, convincing a bunch of concurrent threads to get along with minimal locking is subtle.

* `store.rs`: A package data store with slots that completes the implementation by providing
  a safe `Reader` based abstraction on the store.

Within `store.rs`, there are actually two tags per slot.
An authoritative tag in a `Vec<AtomicTag>`, and a mirrored tag that lives inline with the data being stored in the slot.
The idea here is that during search, we can emit prefetches for the data we're going to process and either get the mirror for free, or take advantage of locality to avoid something like a page fault.
This mirror tag can then be used for the safety check instead.
For quantization algorithms like spherical that don't always generate a nice power-of-two number of bytes, there is likely unused space in our cache line padding so this 1-byte tag can be stored for free.

### Reconciling Performance

Even though we've brought the concurrency overhead down to just 1-byte per slot with a light weight check (about 6 instructions), this is still strictly more data than the current index.
This is particularly painful for datasets like "sift", where any additional read pulls in an additional cache line, moving from 2 cachelines to 3.
There is a little bit of work that can be done.
PR [1067](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/pull/1067) moved the search contract behind a single `expand_beam` function.
PR 1026 uses a variation of [bring your own type-erasure](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/pull/1068) to enable distance layers to

* Inline their final distance functions directly into the `expand_beam` implementation rather than relying on [function pointers](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/blob/main/diskann-vector/src/distance/distance_provider.rs).
* Further, length-specialized implementation can communicate their element byte size via const-generics, allowing the final `expand_beam` implementation to emit the exact number of prefetch instructions.

As an example, the `expand_beam` inner loop for 100-dimensional L2 vectors compiles to the following assembly:
```
.LBB4_27:                                   | Check if all neighbors have been processed
        mov r10, r15                        |
        add rdx, 4                          |
        mov rax, rsi                        |
        cmp r14, rdx                        |
        je .LBB4_30                         |
.LBB4_23:
        mov r14, r10
        mov r8, qword ptr [rbx + 16]          | Prefetch if there are still items to prefetch
        mov r10, qword ptr [rbx + 24]         |
        mov rsi, rbp                          |
        cmp rax, rbp                          |
        je .LBB4_25                           |
        mov esi, dword ptr [r15 + 4*rax]      |
        imul rsi, r10                         |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi + 384]  |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi]        |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi + 64]   |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi + 128]  |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi + 192]  |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi + 256]  |
        prefetcht0 byte ptr [r8 + rsi + 320]  |
        inc rax
        mov rsi, rax
.LBB4_25:
        mov eax, dword ptr [r15 + rdx]        | Safety tag check
        imul r10, rax                         |
        add r8, r10                           |
        movzx r10d, byte ptr [r11 + r8]       |
        cmp r10b, -2                          |
        jb .LBB4_27                           |
        vmovups ymm2, ymmword ptr [rdi]                 | Inlined Distance Computation
        vmovups ymm3, ymmword ptr [rdi + 32]            |
        vmovups ymm4, ymmword ptr [rdi + 64]            |
        vsubps ymm2, ymm2, ymmword ptr [r8]             |
        vmovups ymm5, ymmword ptr [rdi + 96]            |
        vfmadd213ps ymm2, ymm2, ymm0                    |
        ... repeats a lot                               |
        vfmadd213ps ymm3, ymm3, ymm4                    |
        vaddps ymm3, ymm5, ymm3                         |
        vmaskmovps ymm4, ymm1, ymmword ptr [rcx]        |
        vaddps ymm2, ymm2, ymm3                         |
        vmaskmovps ymm3, ymm1, ymmword ptr [r8 + 384]   |
        vsubps ymm3, ymm4, ymm3                         |
        vfmadd213ps ymm3, ymm3, ymm2                    |
        vextractf128 xmm2, ymm3, 1                      |
        vaddps xmm2, xmm3, xmm2                         |
        vshufpd xmm3, xmm2, xmm2, 1                     |
        vaddps xmm2, xmm2, xmm3                         |
        vmovshdup xmm3, xmm2                            |
        vaddss xmm2, xmm2, xmm3                         |
        mov r8, qword ptr [rsp + 8]
        mov dword ptr [r9 + 8*r8], eax                  | Write Back
        vmovss dword ptr [r9 + 8*r8 + 4], xmm2          |
        inc r8                                          |
        mov qword ptr [rsp + 8], r8                     |
        jmp .LBB4_27
```
To prevent compile time explosions, these aggressively optimized inner loops are only generated once and then packaged in a trait object.
This avoids re-monomorphization as different closures and iterators that can be passed to the top level `SearchAccessor::expand_beam` method.

The hope with this specialization hook is that we can tune and optimize `expand_beam` more aggressively than our current providers to offset the extra byte read (and search accessor creation times due to epoch registration).

### Testing

Our current in-memory index uses a [very large](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/blob/main/diskann-providers/src/index/diskann_async.rs) test file with ad-hoc tests.
PR 1206 uses the [A/B test functionality](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/pull/900) in `diskann-benchmark-runner` to

* Execute [longer running](https://github.com/microsoft/DiskANN/pull/1199) tests.
* Gather richer metrics and recall stats for these tests.
* Compare against a checked-in JSON baseline and notify of any changes.

To allow for future adaptability, the baseline can be regenerated with the `DISKANN_TEST=overwrite` environment variable setting.
Since the baseline is raw JSON, changes will show up in the git diff for reviewers to inspect.

The goal here is to enable more robust testing of the in-memory index and by-extension the core DiskANN algorithm.

## Trade-offs

All of this is fairly complex stuff to solve an insidious safety loophole.
And unfortunately, the concurrency infrastructure is not strictly needed for static in-memory builds.
I've been thinking about this a lot, and have never really been able to come up with a scheme that provides the read-only property with such little overhead.
I am more than happy to entertain alternative ideas.

## Benchmark Results

Incoming, but inmem2 is generally on-par with inmem1 (except for sift, where is has about a 10% performance regression).
For streaming workloads, the hard deletes required by inmem2 may actually lead to higher recall.

## Future Work

- [ ] Add quantization (this will require figuring out how an extra blob can be protected by `store` - this is a solvable problem).
- [ ] Implement saving and loading.
- [ ] Optimize `expand_beam` a little more.
- [ ] Migrate existing users over to inmem2.
